Engineering Principles (#6)
MetaMask/contributor-docs: docs/engineering-principles.md

# Engineering Principles

> Engineering principles define the core tenets and beliefs that the engineering team and all contributors are expected to keep front of mind. These tenets are meant to reflect the values of the organization as well as the philosophy upon which the software was founded. Principles typically come in the form of punchy one line statements, but a great deal of depth can be written on each one to further inform of the intent of the statement.

Reviewer: Since these are aspirational goals rather than a reflection of current or past practices of our team, it seemed better to omit the part where it suggests the software is founded on these principles. It's misleading, and the sentence seems fine without that part.
```suggestion
Engineering principles define the core tenets and beliefs that the engineering team and all contributors are expected to keep front of mind. These tenets are meant to reflect the values of the organization. Principles typically come in the form of punchy one line statements, but a great deal of depth can be written on each one to further inform of the intent of the statement.
```

> Engineering principles define the core tenents and beliefs that the engineering team and all contributors are expected to keep front of mind. These tenents are meant to reflect the values of the organization as well as the philosophy upon which the software was founded. Principles typically come in the form of punchy one line statements, but a great deal of depth can be written on each one to further inform of the intent of the statement.

Reviewer 2: Should this be tenets?
```suggestion
Engineering principles define the core tenets and beliefs that the engineering team and all contributors are expected to keep front of mind. These tenets are meant to reflect the values of the organization as well as the philosophy upon which the software was founded. Principles typically come in the form of punchy one line statements, but a great deal of depth can be written on each one to further inform of the intent of the statement.
```

Author: Im old school, @georgewrmarshall lol

## Core Engineering Values
These one word statements are used to not only capture the qualities we strive for in our software, but also prioritizes those values. Keep in mind that being the last value in this list does not imply it is of no importance, it is still more important than all of the other qualities not mentioned here. 
1. Security
2. Stability

> 3. Safety

Reviewer: Curious how this differs from "security". Depending on the definition, one might encompass the other.

Maybe these should all have definitions anyway

Author: Probably yeah. I'll work on definitions and condense the two mentioned if i can't articulate the difference.

Author: @Gudahtt i'm going to remove safety, for now, and put off writing descriptions for these to a new PR

4. Privacy
5. Maintainability
6. Usability

## Principles
### The Principle of Least Authority

> Provide application code the absolute minimal amount of authority required to perform it's essential functions. Wherever appropriate, break down large methods with broad authority into smaller functions with minimal authority. Minimizing what a method *can* do reduces the scope of what could possibly go wrong. When something does go wrong, small isolated methods, written with the least amount of authority required, are easier to troubleshoot.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Provide application code the absolute minimal amount of authority required to perform its essential functions. Wherever appropriate, break down large methods with broad authority into smaller functions with minimal authority. Minimizing what a method *can* do reduces the scope of what could possibly go wrong. When something does go wrong, small isolated methods, written with the least amount of authority required, are easier to troubleshoot.
```
correct grammar

> ### The Principle of Core Purity

Reviewer: Was this meant to say "Code purity"?

Author: No, there's a "principle" of software development called "functional sandwich" which describes keeping the "core" or middle of the application layer pure and functional, and moving imperative code to the outer layer. I dislike the phrase functional sandwich and was trying to be crafty with the words but still  keeping the sentiment. Could you suggest an alternative? We could make it "Code Purity" as it definitely fits and is something i'd like for us to strive for.

Reviewer: I'm having trouble applying this principle to our codebase. Most of us probably conceptualize the controllers as "core" to the codebase for example, and their primary purpose is to be _the place_ where we handle mutable state.

I'm not sure what the "outer edge" of the UI would be either :thinking:

Reviewer: Maybe this advice is too specific to be at this level? Or maybe there is a different way to describe where stateful things should happen, instead of "outer edges of the application layer"?

Author: Changed this to code purity and removed sentiment around layers/core in favor of just "majority of code should be pure" as a goal

Reviewer: Hmm. This now seems even more out of place now.

Can we remove this principle for now? It seems like more of a stylistic preference than a principle. It's a preference that I share, but this doesn't seem like the appropriate place for it. Maybe it's better suited to being in a guide on how to make your code easier to read, or a guide on how to design APIs to be more easily tested.

Reviewer: I agree that it's appropriate for "best practices". I was thinking of "best practices" as falling under guides but we could definitely split them up if that would be helpful.

Author: https://github.com/MetaMask/contributor-docs/pull/6/commits/74988a28113866d59c1cebcafaffbcbc28d6d691 I removed this principle here.

Whenever possible prefer small, pure functions. Pure functions are those that given the same inputs will always return the same output, and that have no side effects. Where side effects must occur, keep the core of the application code pure and move imperative methods to the outer edges of the application layer.

### The Principle of Incremental Change

To minimize the risk to the stability and security of the application, changes to the code should be incremental and as small as possible. Large changes to the codebase become difficult to review effectively and make the commit history less itemized. Furthermore, incremental change promotes better test coverage and makes it easier to require tests to cover the introduced changes.

### The Principle of Incremental Decentralization

> We may sometimes ship with centralized servies by default, but if we must, users should be able to opt out of any of these during onboarding, ideally easily swapping them out for decentralized alternatives. When we build features that rely upon centralized services we must build them in such a way where the experience isn't completely broken when the service is disrupted. We are trying to build a decentralized future and we must make choices that move us directionally towards those goals.

Reviewer 2: Should this be services?
```suggestion
We may sometimes ship with centralized services by default, but if we must, users should be able to opt out of any of these during onboarding, ideally easily swapping them out for decentralized alternatives. When we build features that rely upon centralized services we must build them in such a way where the experience isn't completely broken when the service is disrupted. We are trying to build a decentralized future and we must make choices that move us directionally towards those goals.
```

### The Principle of Self-Soverign Identity

We believe in the right of our users to own their own identity and data. We must go to great lengths to protect that right. Where we have features or services that might infringe upon that right we must treat those features as opt in, not opt out. When we do build features that make user data known to us we must not collect any personally identifiable information, and any data that can be tied to any chain must be collected in an anonymity protecting way. This principle must be extended to cover all third party code as well.

### The Principle of Auditability

> All code contributions must be reviewed thoroughly for code quality, usability and adherence to these principles. Code contributions must be kept as small as possible (see Principle of Incremental Change) to promote auditability. Avoid long running feature branches because they are not auditable, and pose a risk to the stability and security of the product.

Reviewer: Is this saying that we, as a team, should commit to thoroughly auditing our work? Or that we should be committed as a team to making our work easy to audit? Or both?

Reviewer: It feels like this principle and the "incremental change" are touching upon some shared idea. I know they're different but they are closely related :thinking:

Author: Both, and while I agree that incremental change is a requirement for auditability, they have different intentions. One is focusing on incremental change as a safety mechanism and to prevent drastic changes in behavior in a single pull request. The other is about making sure we both review code thoroughly and that we make it easy for our code to be reviewed. I'm going to update the definitions of these slightly to further the differences between them, rather than condensing into one.

### The Principle of "Be Methodical and Fix Things"

> We should prioritize fixing bugs and improving stability over creating new features whenever possible. All code generates new bugs and builds technical debt, this is inevitable. However, if we focus on building our features with stability in mind and throw out the "Move Fast and Break Things" mentality of most web 2.0 applications we can minimize the amount of bugs we introduce. Furthermore, whenever bugs are known to exist we should expend the necessary energy to remedy them. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Prioritize fixing bugs and improving stability over creating new features whenever possible. All code generates new bugs and builds technical debt, this is inevitable. However, if we focus on building our features with stability in mind and throw out the "Move Fast and Break Things" mentality of most web 2.0 applications, we can minimize the amount of bugs we introduce. Furthermore, whenever bugs are known to exist, we should expend the necessary energy to remedy them.
```

> We should prioritize fixing bugs and improving stability over creating new features whenever possible. All code generates new bugs and builds technical debt, this is inevitable. However, if we focus on building our features with stability in mind and throw out the "Move Fast and Break Things" mentality of most web 2.0 applications we can minimize the amount of bugs we introduce. Furthermore, whenever bugs are known to exist we should expend the necessary energy to remedy them. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We prioritize fixing bugs and improving stability over creating new features whenever possible. All code generates new bugs and builds technical debt, this is inevitable. However, if we focus on building our features with stability in mind and throw out the "Move Fast and Break Things" mentality of most web 2.0 applications, we can minimize the amount of bugs we introduce. Furthermore, whenever bugs are known to exist, we should expend the necessary energy to remedy them.
```

> ### The Principle of Ecosystem Momentum

Reviewer: I don't understand what "ecosystem momentum" means. In the description momentum is referenced in one line, which I also don't understand:

>We must view these breaking changes as a potential reset of our momentum within the ecosystem.

Otherwise the text here seems to primarily talk about API stability, and the challenges and consequences of breaking changes.

Maybe it refers to the ecosystem's rate of growth? The rate of growth in our userbase, or our developer/dapp userbase? The growth of the "MetaMask-compatible dapps" ecosystem?

Author: I was taking it to mean the MetaMask compatible dapps ecosystem, which I could either spell out to further clarify, or we could consider an entire reword of this principle. Do you feel strongly one way or the other?

Reviewer 4: One way I am looking at "ecosystem momentum" is given that momentum = mass x velocity, I am thinking ecosystem momentum = dapp compatibility x velocity. The velocity would be correlated with the API stability and our ability to mitigate downtime with any breaking changes. Maybe another way to say
> We must view these breaking changes as a potential reset of our momentum within the ecosystem.

could be

> We must view these breaking changes as a hindrance to our momentum within the ecosystem.

I am liking this "The Principle of Ecosystem Momentum" proposal to keep us accountable as providers in the ecosystem. Maybe we can make it clearer that this is in regards to the dapps ecosystem. Links might also be helpful here.

Reviewer: I think it would be clearer if the title more directly talked about not breaking dapps. Something like Linux's "Don't break userspace", or "Don't break the web" for browser changes. Those are nice and succinct, easy to remember, and I often hear them repeated in discussions.

Reviewer 4: +1 to make the title clearer (after my overthinking above 😄). Some other suggestions: "The Principle of Reliable Dapp Support" or "The Principle of Providing Dapp Stability"

Author: I went with "principle of reliability" and added feature deprecation as a thing we should treat carefully as well. Open to tinkering the name with other options

Author: @Gudahtt @digiwand is this comment line resolved or do we need further revisions?

Reviewer: I think it's OK for now

> We provide external facing APIs that developers rely upon to build out their products. Every change we make to those APIs must be analyzed for potentially breaking functionality of the apps in our ecosystem. When we make breaking changes we are creating work for countless other organizations and individuals, and only by their good graces will they make the requested changes. We must view these breaking changes as a potential reset of our momentum within the ecosystem. Breaking changes should only be made for critical reasons of security or stability that cannot be made by any other means. Furthermore, a migration period of no less than six weeks must be planned and ecosystem outreach must occur to ensure a smooth transition.

Reviewer: Maybe better to be less specific about the migration period. Depending on what the change is, 6 months might be ample time or it might be nowhere near enough.
```suggestion
We provide external facing APIs that developers rely upon to build out their products. Every change we make to those APIs must be analyzed for potentially breaking functionality of the apps in our ecosystem. When we make breaking changes we are creating work for countless other organizations and individuals, and only by their good graces will they make the requested changes. We must view these breaking changes as a potential reset of our momentum within the ecosystem. Breaking changes should only be made for critical reasons of security or stability that cannot be made by any other means. Furthermore, a generous migration period must be planned and ecosystem outreach must occur to ensure a smooth transition.
```

> We provide external facing APIs that developers rely upon to build out their products. Every change we make to those APIs must be analyzed for potentially breaking functionality of the apps in our ecosystem. When we make breaking changes we are creating work for countless other organizations and individuals, and only by their good graces will they make the requested changes. We must view these breaking changes as a potential reset of our momentum within the ecosystem. Breaking changes should only be made for critical reasons of seucrity or stability that cannot be made by any other means. Furthermore, a migration period of no less than six weeks must be planned and ecosystem outreach must occur to ensure a smooth transition.

Reviewer 2: seucrity  => security
```suggestion
We provide external facing APIs that developers rely upon to build out their products. Every change we make to those APIs must be analyzed for potentially breaking functionality of the apps in our ecosystem. When we make breaking changes we are creating work for countless other organizations and individuals, and only by their good graces will they make the requested changes. We must view these breaking changes as a potential reset of our momentum within the ecosystem. Breaking changes should only be made for critical reasons of security or stability that cannot be made by any other means. Furthermore, a migration period of no less than six weeks must be planned and ecosystem outreach must occur to ensure a smooth transition.
```
